talking to Dr. Gregorian.
Why don't we start?
I love the essay that Philip Hamburger wrote about you for The New Yorker, which was republished, and I have it, and I've prepared.
I've read it several times.
I will probably even quote this.
He uses a concluding paragraph of that piece as an epigraph to one of my chapters where he writes about going into the reading room, and he says...
how the green lights, first of all, he tries to go onto the computer, and it says, help, and then he walks up into the room, and everything is quiet, and it's hushed, and he felt safe again, surrounded by these readers and by these books.
I love that.
I love that piece.
You said in that piece that when you, and really, I don't intend this to be a conversation about your years necessarily at the New York Public Library, but I think it is pertinent to quote there where you say,
You suggest that you arrive in New York, you're in the right place at the right time to help that institution through a period.
I suspect you probably would feel the same way about your years here at Brown.
No, that was completely different.
Okay.
New York Public Library was taken for granted by New Yorkers.
Therefore, it's declined in many ways.
was considered as part of general decline of New York.
So when I arrived in New York, I had no notion of the libraries and their plight and their centrality.
I knew library was important.
I'd spend all my academic life in California, in Texas,
Pennsylvania the university librarian reported to me I knew about issues of the libraries always in relation to the university if you could not get a book we could get it through loan program and so forth so that there was nothing that would prevent your research I could send you to Moscow
because I had no books.
You could take a sabbatical.
Many universities could cope with their deficiencies.
They could cope.
They can.
Because if you don't have it, you can get from somewhere else.
The issue of New York Public Library, which I did not realize when I took over, was that it was, in a sense, what I mentioned in the article.
It's a university of universities.
It was a kind of central edifice of cultural life of New York.
And if you did not have, you could not get from somewhere else.
Period.
Because public libraries were always conceived to be the equalizers in our culture.
Two institutions were considered very important.
Most public school systems.
to give you a chance.
The other one, to give you a chance throughout your entire life, was New York Public Library.
So when I assumed the role of president, my first meeting on Wall Street with the trustees of New York Public Library, which by the way, I was late 40 minutes because the Russian driver did not know Wall Street.
They know where it is now, don't they?
They know now.
But anyway, my first meeting with the board, on the agenda was how to sell collections, how to shut down some of the branches.
How to sell collections?
Yeah.
That's a major concern of this new book, by the way, too, the deaccessioning of it.
How to sell collections.
some collections valuable, how to charge for use, and how to shut down some of the branches, and how to curtail the hours.
Wow.
The ad that was meant to appeal to New Yorkers was a big ad in the New York Times
that if New York Public Library did not exist, there were a big parking place in mid-Malhattan.
So my notion was that people won't assist a dying institution.
They will not assist.
They will pay for a funeral cost for old time's sake.
But they will not assist a dying institution.
So, what I considered when I came to New York, that that is not a question, cannot even put a matter of question.
New York Public Library has to survive.
Not an option in New York?
Not an option at all.
So don't even talk about it.
You have to stress how central it is, how crucial it is, and how wonderful it is.
Because New York Public Library had one thing that most libraries do not.
That was truly, in my opinion, and was popularized after I mentioned by Nolan Mailer and others, people's palace.
People's palace.
It was built with marble.
It was built to last.
Because culture had to last.
Knowledge had to last.
But it also had something else, which most libraries do not have.
You did not have to give your identity.
Nobody checked your driver's license.
You could give your name as Karl Marx or Freud.
And the other thing is, your privacy, which impressed me.
This is not unique, however, to the New York Public Library.
I mean, or is it?
It is.
In many ways, other libraries, you need a car to use.
You don't need a car at the New York Public Library?
You walk in from the street, go directly to the manuscript division, go to the genealogy, says, I'd like to see.
A gentle madness.
That explains why.
Because I collect library cards, and I tried to apply for one there, and they said, well, you don't need one.
And I thought, well, maybe they were just being nice to me.
I guess it's policy.
I didn't realize that.
Branch libraries need for circulation.
But at a search library, you don't need a card.
As a matter of fact, my first time when I arrived in New York, I went to New York Public Library, Slavic Division.
And nobody asked me for a card, and I told them.
I was there illegally.
I left.
Birch Museum, Bibliotheque Nationale, you need a card, an ID, a picture of everything.
Not that in your public library.
Wonderful.
Second, we have a law that you don't circulate what has been circulated.
information about circulation of circulated books to individuals for a century.
Somebody wants to come and ask us, what did you read?
None of their business.
No, that's very sacred material.
That's like talking to somebody's psychiatrist.
Well, that's also, so it impressed me very much.
But anyway, to answer your direct question,
I had a thought that the cause was so valuable that if you succeed, it would be a miracle.
If you failed, it would be a great march return.
Either way, you could not lose it.
What accounts for it?
I mean, that library opened in 1911.
This was 1981.
Seventy years.
Was there a decline in our culture?
I mean, did we no longer... No decline.
First of all, great confusion by the term of public.
New York Public Library is a private library.
Which I made clear in this book, and I'm going to make even more clear in the next book.
Public is used in 19th century sense, British sense, open.
Public now is tax supported.
So that was one thing.
Great confusion.
Second is, it did not have a plan to receive gifts other than books.
It would receive books, archives, but no money to maintain it.
And also cities declined in the 70s.
It was linked to New York Public Library's decline.
Basically, for politicians, everything you cut across the board.
That's an easy way to do it.
Everybody lost it.
But some of the library cuts and so forth were historically very regressive because you cannot catch up periods you did not build, you did not collect, you did not catalog, and so forth.
And also,
The story of New York Public Library, as you well know, was that the building was built by the city at a cost of 11 million dollars in 1911.
There is not a single piece of non-marble in that building.
But it was built with the agreement that the city will build the edifice,
Astor, Lennox, and Tilden will bring their collections there.
And City will maintain the building, and independent board will keep the collections.
So it was public-private partnership.
As one part suffered, the public, the rest suffered.
And also the boards, usually.
I had a different notion about being a trustee in your public life.
In 1927, the world has one of the greatest cartoons, Feeding the Lions.
JP Morgan, Rockefeller, who else, Vanderbilt, all of them have one million dollars putting in the mouth of the lions.
You mean patient support to the lions?
Yes, they're feeding, million dollars.
Because to be trustee,
it meant you covered the deficit from your own pocket.
There was no fundraising, no public involvement.
So as a result, in 1980, by 1980, when I arrived, there was an article in the New York Times, actually, that New York Public Library
face $50 million deficit, and that it will have no endowment left, therefore it had to sell collections and so forth.
Did they prioritize the collection that they were going to sell?
Yes, collections.
Well, I mean, Audubon.
What was your reaction to that?
My reaction was simply, you don't oppose things when you're first meeting.
You say, let's study, come up with.
First reaction was that New York Public Library does not need class.
It has class.
It gives class to people.
So that it should be an honor to belong to this board, its most classy board.
So you're dealing with learning,
In many ways, you're also dealing with two issues, elitism and populism.
Elitism and populism?
Good for ordinary people, as well as for writers, scientists, and so forth.
Some of the great inventions were done at the New York Public Library.
Polaroid was developed there.
By using the materials that were there?
The technology did.
You talk about the treasures that are there, right?
Ready to be... Ready.
I mean, you don't know who's working at what and where.
So, that it's central.
Failure is not an option.
That was the issue.
So then, my timing, the reason you quote that was right, because it had reached rock bottom in many ways.
The exhibition hall was...
for accounting offices.
They partitioned that with partitions.
Bartos Forum was for storage.
I gave a talk there two years ago.
Storage.
And public donations, their ambition was to ask $35 from each donor.
just to keep up where they were.
So first option was to make failure a non-option.
Second one was to bring the rich and the mighty into an alliance with educators and intelligentsia.
It was very crucial.
And there Mrs. Astor was instrumental.
And Richard Solomon, who was former
head of Charles de Ritz.
He brought Philanthropes, and Andrew Heiskel, former head of Time Life.
So there's a great combination between private philanthropy, business, corporate, and intelligentsia.
Then, of course, you have to bring the mayor another woman.
city council and so forth.
But because it was public, the branch libraries had not to be neglected, because that's where the political muscle was.
So we build a tremendous political and intellectual and social power on behalf of the New York Public Library.
The first act was to clean the building.
People will see what they had.
And then second, extend the hours.
their collections, bring air conditioning to the whole library, preservation.
Actually, a lot.
As a matter of fact, I have something up here.
I was mentioning the fact that
the timing was right because that hit button.
And then the combination of forces were right.
And also the very fact that I did not know its limitations.
Had I been here, I would have seen constraints.
Coming from outside, I only saw its possibilities.
So that's the other way.
Here, of course,
We came, and this is relevant, according to the New York Times, you built the library from 2 million to 3 million books.
At a time, may I say, when I see, and I've been traveling extensively for this new book, one of your sister schools in the Ivy League tells me, Cornell, that they are under a mandate from their trustees,
to reduce their collections from 6.8 million to 6 million on campus by the year 2000, and all that that might involve.
And I say, why can't you put the overflowing, but you own all the land between here and Syracuse.
You know, do what Harvard does.
Deposit for you.
But that's not the direction they're going in.
I mean, they have wonderful collections, but they're more interested in the digital stuff,
and they're working, they're cutting edge, they're doing all kinds of things with Eastman Kodak and with Xerox.
I spent two days up there just looking at the technology that they did.
You, on the other hand, and the hamburger piece, and I'm sure that in the essays that you're going to give me, you profess a great respect for technology, for the computer, and for what it can offer, but I sense in you a deep, abiding, a non-negotiable respect and love
Do you say libraries are sacred places and books are sacred objects?
I don't know.
I guess that's a question in a way.
Well, I don't want to repeat what you read, but basically I believe that
Libraries are not centers of information.
Thank you.
It's a question here.
I mean, because they're changing the names of these places.
The University of Michigan just opened a brand new facility.
I've already forgotten what they call it.
Information center.
They're not centers of information.
They're centers of learning.
And there's a difference between getting information in your room.
You can get it on your computer terminal, information.
There's difference between that.
There's difference between reading, which I contemplate back.
It's almost like you can get a video and watch something at home.
It's not the same thing that when you would sit with 800 people.
It's a collective participation in a movie.
Videos have not eliminated movies.
In the same way, I don't think
computers are going to eliminate libraries.
Libraries are cultural institutions.
If you have a chance, whenever you go to New York, go to Barnes and Noble.
Chant with people till midnight.
People sitting, reading there and so forth.
Cappuccino.
Cappuccino, this and so forth.
I read in yesterday's time, somebody
said that he had read the entire Dostoyevsky, just sitting there to see whether somebody would say leave.
Nobody would say leave.
They know what it's about.
The terminals there are used to find the books.
They don't say, come to Barnes and Noah get some information.
And I believe also there's going to be peaceful coexistence between the book
which is not only, it's a historical artifact, the book, not just containable information.
And as you see in this essay, which I'll give you, that I say, there is a dialectical interplay between the author and the book.
Yeah, each author, we have
Each author has responsibility to readers, and readers have responsibilities to the authors.
A book started by author is finished by a reader.
And the other thing I say in this essay, that you have to be a re-reader, not just reader, to re-read.
Information does not do that.
Because reading is a kind of, I conceive to be, the last
private act left.
The cultural act.
And so the book I consider also historical artifacts and at the same time... Thank you.
I'm looking for everyone.
Yeah, look under Franklin Murphy and Huntington Library.
This was a place elsewhere, reading in the age of the computer.
Oh, wonderful.
And it is the debate between this one or divided knowledge.
Excellent.
I just got back from Toronto.
I spent three days up there.
The University of Toronto, which is 10 million volume.
And it's very interesting.
I'd never thought of it in this context before.
And it's almost paradoxical with the way you see... Some of these are repetitive, but you'll forgive me.
Oh, I like repetition.
And this is... Oh, good, yeah.
Oh, this is terrific.
This is all the things done in eight years.
Lecture series, exhibitions.
Excellent.
Thank you.
And I'm not trying to, as I said, I am looking for insights.
If it's at all possible, I know we've only got an hour today.
Do you think... No, we can get together again.
Can we get together again, either here or in New York?
Sure.
Or in the library.
Yeah, I think so.
Because I think you can see that this is going to be a very good book.
Very exciting book.
Where was I going?
Toronto, for instance, 10 million volumes.
This decision was made in the 1950s.
If you're going to be regarded as a great institution, then you have to have a measurable collection.
Do you agree with that?
Yes.
Books as objects matter.
I consider, you will read there, great universities are known by great libraries.
They're liabilities.
Now, one problem that will be emerging, and there is a
document, if you can make a note and ask me, I'll send it to you.
One of my colleagues here, Brian Hawkins, is an expert on this.
By the year 2003 or 2005, all of our monies of research libraries will be able to buy 5% of available material.
So that is going to necessitate a great deal of cooperation.
5% of what you need.
Is that what you mean?
What is available, not what you need.
Let's say every year, Frankfurt Book Fair, 850,000 titles alone.
So we cannot afford to buy.
But you would want all 850,000.
No, but you will not.
But how you select it, why you select what you select, is going to be a key issue.
You see, as a Times piece, I'm really impressed by your going from two million to three million, but I'm equally as interested in how you decided which million, which books you chose.
I heard a cute story while I was in Toronto, the University of New York, which was established in the 60s, and they had no books.
So their first act was to go to Star Bookstore in Boston and buy out every book in this.
It's a true story.
buy out every book in the secondhand bookstore here, and then go to Montreal and buy out all the books in Ducharme's store.
And that was the seed for life.
But it's kind of funny, but we're easy.
Somewhere to begin.
Selectivity, as you read in there, selectivity is the biggest issue.
Of course, and that anticipates my question.
So you must have come, not only are we going to strengthen the collections, but clearly we have to
have a strategy in place.
Yeah, the strategy usually is, in sciences, you rely mostly on journals which are antiquated in a couple of years.
So one of the possibilities you're going to have in the future, that most scientific publication would be electronic.
And that makes sense.
Because who wants to read?
There are 850,000 titles in chemistry alone that come up every year.
Well, you don't have to have all of them here.
Basically, the humanities and social sciences and history of science, those are the areas.
And there, the problem is how you decide where to concentrate.
Because the problem that we did not have in
16th, 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries.
There was one notion of world civilization.
Everybody contributed to that.
So we could use progress.
This was the prevailing notion?
The prevailing notion was that it was civilization.
It was a civilized people.
Why?
Because there was some agreement as to what constitutes civilization.
So, in my book, the biggest purveyors and
disseminators of Western civilization.
Having Mao Zedong, you know, take Karl Marx, Hegel, Ricardo, Shakespeare, all over into China.
Imagine.
Because there was notion that we've gone through primeval and medieval feudal
bourgeois capitalist or proletarian revolution, there's progress.
And whoever had contributed progressive phase, you studied those.
So that was one criteria, you could choose books and so forth.
Shakespeare happens to be progressive, so Marx, Lenin, and Stalin, all of them.
So Shakespeare is great.
As a matter of fact, you can measure the years of great repression in Russia, Soviet Union, by saying which are years that many Shakespeare's
texts were published in Russia.
Because many authors and so forth, when they could not write, they became translators of Shakespeare.
Translator of Shakespeare.
That's why they have such a wonderful edition of Shakespeare.
Exactly.
That's the indication that 1937 is a great year of Shakespeare in Russia.
Because you get a new translation.
Yeah.
This is not the one.
There was a book for
This is the same thing.
There was a book, do you remember?
Small Technology and so forth, and Getty.
This summarizes it.
This is it.
This is great.
I'm sorry, you were... And Brian Hawkins, I should... Brian Hawkins has a paper, which I'll send it to you.
It says exactly...
One of the first, I also, in the Times piece, that you also commissioned a study by one of your deans to indicate what students read, is that right?
Was that helpful to you?
Well, what students take, what kind of courses they take.
You know?
Because I didn't, whatever he says, students are encouraged to take.
I said, that's not enough.
Let's go transcript by transcript.
what courses our students take.
So you would know whether you're following genre of fiction or reality.
But that was not determining a source of buying books and so forth, but rather seeing trends.
How about, was Shakespeare popular?
Who else?
If I were to tell you that, and this is just something that I was told, that Amherst College, for instance, two or three years ago,
gave a summa cum laude to an English major who had never taken a course in Shakespeare, had never been required to study Chaucer, Milton, or Spencer.
Now, I don't know whether or not this individual is familiar with these writers, but he got a degree in English literature, graduated summa.
Yeah, without going to foundations.
What's your response to that?
My response, that's very unlikely.
It's an exception rather than the rule.
For one very simple reason.
When you deal with Brown, we have 15,000 applicants for 1,350 places.
1,350.
So 2,000, 3,000 valedictorians have applied.
2,000 valedictorians.
Top 1% of class have applied.
From schools where they already have 1,450 SATs, 1,350, straight A, and they're achievers.
So they come from prep schools when you have to read Shakespeare.
They come from public good high schools when they have to read Shakespeare and so forth.
The issue is whether or not they take advanced courses or not.
So it's slightly misleading if you compare all the universities.
And I will bet this individual in Amherst was undoubtedly... I do not know.
I don't know.
I intend to find out.
Whether he had taken.
At the same time, what you have... That's more a philosophical question.
You know where I'm going.
You know what's happening.
As you see about the fragmentation of knowledge, which I deal with.
Actually, I wish I had known I would have sent all of this to you, because I'm covering all of this poorly by jumping from one topic to the other.
But the good thing is,
If you'll see me again, I'll have a chance to transcribe this tape.
You don't have to transcribe.
You just read these ones.
Eighty percent of your questions are there, answers.
Then we'll have another set of questions.
And then you begin, as Portman is saying.
Yes, yes.
Then we can begin.
I'm sorry, I had a... Well, now you're going to the Carnegie Corporation.
And, of course, the beginning...
That noble exercise began with the formation of libraries.
Well, it became something more than that.
Carnegie Foundation Corporation was created in 1911 by Andrew Carnegie.
It's been years.
Andrew Carnegie.
Ironically, of the second foreign-born president of Carnegie,
The first one being Carnegie himself.
But basically he had two notions, the reason it began before that.
First he believed in the notion, a very revolutionary one at the time, that public wealth, that capitalists are trustees of public wealth.
That wealth was given to you, not to your family.
That you earned it through your endeavor.
And therefore, he had an obligation to give it back.
So Carnegie thought that he had to give back.
And by that, therefore, he created libraries.
As a matter of fact, he is the one who told the city of New York that I'll give you X number of libraries, provided those libraries are run and operated.
by the Independent Board, the New York Public Library Board.
Very precious, isn't it, really?
So that's where you can have, not the city bureaucracy, but the Independent Board governing, and city providing support.
But Carnegie forgot something, inflation.
It would be provided amply for all of them.
So that was one thing.
Henry Huntington, the same thing.
The Morgan, the same thing.
They thought they were set forever.
They set forever.
They did not.
And the other one that Carnegie did, education, public learning.
And the third one was international conflict.
Actually, there is a Russian counterpart to Carnegie, who did not blossom as much as Carnegie.
His name was Ivan Blyok.
I'm going to have a chapter in Eastern European library.
Ivan Blyok.
How do we spell his name?
Ivan, Ivan.
Ivan, of course, yeah.
Blyok.
B-A-I-O-C-H, Blyok, I guess.
The Russian counterpart.
Yeah, he was the Tsar of railway system and industries in Russia.
He was also a pacifist.
He also, he forecast the exact cost of World War I. Really?
That would be catastrophic.
A capitalist has no excuse for war.
There's plenty for everyone.
Science will think people, technology will think people.
But Kardec believed in libraries, in schools, and learning, and international conflict resolution.
So Kardec's main trust is now
education and resolutions of international conflict.
But do you foresee or would you hope, and again, you haven't even begun the job yet.
We're sitting here in March and we still have enough seven, eight months to go here.
But do you think that it would be within the scope of Carnegie's agenda to return to
Well, I do not know yet because I have to see what they're doing, why they're doing, how they're doing, and then set new priorities.
So we have to see.
I always study institution before I embark on change.
That's the key phrase.
as you've already articulated for these last two.
By the way, before I forget, there's a chapter in here on the HRC at the University of Texas.
Yeah.
I'm very familiar with it.
I was in Texas.
I know that.
That's why I mentioned, when I was going through your biography, I said, my God, maybe I should have talked to you when I was doing this.
It's a wonderful chapter.
It tells, more than ever has been published, just about how Harry Ransom and... I knew him well, Harry Ransom.
John Silber talked to me.
Yeah.
and ceremoniously sent out his way in 1971.
It was almost like he was waiting to talk to me after, you know.
You talked to him?
Oh yeah, I had a long interview with him there.
It's in the chapter called Instant Ivy.
I call it Instant Ivy.
Well, the basic thing there, I'm sure you've covered it, Harry Ransom's genius was to consider books as a capital project.
Because Texas, the reason Harry Ransom was successful,
was not for his love of books and so forth.
University of Texas system, entire higher education system, is dependent on available funds, which is the product of oil money.
Because initially, University of Texas was downtown.
I mean, they kicked it out, greedy ones, put it out, and they struck oil.
So they could not...
So as a result, anybody in Texas, higher education, you can be capital projects with available funds.
But other funds have to come from state authorization.
So you have HRC, easily can be built.
You can buy all the collections, you can hire a ransom, convince the legislature that books are capital projects.
I'd never heard a statement quite like that.
I wish I had talked to you a lot.
That's what it is.
Capital project.
As it's a capital project, it succeeded.
Later, it dawned on that.
But you were not able to get legislature to give you librarians, salaries, and so forth.
But he was a genius at what he did.
He was a genius.
And it's a fun, fun chapter.
It's one of my very favorite chapters in the whole book.
How do you stand on these canon wars that are going on?
Do you have an opinion on this?
Well, I think it's the wrong war, to be frank with you.
The issue is not canon.
The issue is how you cope with explosion of knowledge.
Nobody has a solution to that.
That's the issue that's frustrating.
You take Harvard Classics, 80% are no longer classics.
That's right.
What's the definition of a classic?
And I mentioned canon.
It's a, you can check this in one of these dictionaries.
It comes from Arabic.
What does it mean?
It's been standard.
So, but check that.
So, let me just mention, this is a very difficult subject, but let me just mention a couple of things as you write your book.
We had, at one time, European civilization.
Suddenly, I don't know when, maybe when Byzantium was created, because Western Empire and Eastern Empire,
suddenly became Western civilization.
Never has defined itself.
During World War I, French wrote that Germany is not part of Western civilization.
Which is ridiculous, of course.
They have incorporated Dostoyevsky, Tolstoy, and even maybe Turgenev or Gogol as part of Western canon.
And then came Bolshevik Revolution.
So, the West and East separation reinforced the notion of Western Civilization.
Only the Gaul and like that always considered Europe from Atlantic to Europe.
There was a notion also of American Civilization as distinct from European Civilization.
But suddenly under the NATO,
We have combined Western civilization with United States, which is fine.
Canada, they don't know how to include that.
And Europe, Western Europe.
That's wonderful.
So then how do you deal with Greece, modern Greece?
Well, I'm Greek.
I do.
How do you deal with Greece?
Well, it's part of Western, so it has to be.
I hope so.
All right.
Then how do you deal with Turkey?
Well, it's not, but it is.
It's not.
Ottoman and so forth.
So they're very concerned.
How do you deal with Czechoslovakia now?
How do you?
Well, I deal with ambivalence.
How about Hungary?
How about Romania?
As NATO expands now, they're going to include all of these countries, I'm sure, as part of Western civilization.
Then the issue becomes... Well, is it political or is it cultural?
Well, this one, I'm trying to find out.
I think it's mostly political.
When they say Judeo-Christian, Russians are Christians.
So are you excluding Greek Orthodox?
That's nothing.
If so, how come Greeks are included there?
How can you include Yugoslavia?
You know, Slavs.
Are you excluding Slavs?
If so, how do you deal with the Poles?
All kinds of issues.
Coming back to canon,
Canon was an easy way to structure knowledge from Renaissance to 18th century, 19th century.
Then there's breakdown.
Because who did we ask in United States Harvard Press, a member of the Modern Library Board, publishing their series, whom did you ask?
What should be part of it?
Did we ask French Academy of Art Sciences?
Well, they have their own play on editions, though, so I guess we forget.
Well, did we ask them, excuse us, but which is your most important authors to be part of Western canon?
No.
Did we ask English?
Did we ask Russians?
No.
The biggest problem that they have not been able to deal with the canon is Latin America.
There's 500 years of Latin America.
500 years.
It's Italian, it's German, Spanish, Portuguese, European.
Is it part of Western civilization?
If so, how come it has not produced until now one single book worthy of the canon?
I think we're coming to Latin America.
I mean, who could exclude Borges?
But there is no method of determining as to what constitutes part of the canon.
Because now, instead of saying the canon, we say several canons.
Asian civilization canon.
Which is probably the best approach, would you agree with that?
Yes, Asian African civilization.
Before it was simple, you have European civilization.
And in 1930s, by the way, 1930s,
a new thing emerged also.
You had, for the first time, Americans used American civilization.
You know why?
They were afraid of European culture, which had each nation had its own soul, its own blood, its own mentality, or frightened.
So America was civilization combining all different cultures into one civilization, that Roman civilization.
In the 1930s, you have Beatrice and Sidney Webb,
Fabian Socialists, publishing about Soviet Russia, a new civilization.
All of them trying to deal with the issue that is very important, but nobody wants to deal with that.
Concept of progress.
Is there linear concept of progress?
If so, what are foundations that are needed to lead you to that progress?
In the 18th century, they knew, in the Age of Enlightenment.
These are steps.
19th century positivism, these are the stages.
The 20th century is collapse.
And then we have all this post-modernist stuff, which is impenetrable.
Impenetrable.
And I said, first, you have to create before you can deconstruct.
You have to construct before you can deconstruct.
Now, when you talk about all of these
I am interested, in fact, I've been talking about Edward Kasaneck at the public library who's giving me names of people, and he's really suggesting that maybe I might want to spend some time in Eastern Europe and see what has happened to the whole library structure post-Soviet, because during the Soviet period, these are instruments of policy, libraries were.
It was almost like all these nations, all these states didn't have a culture anymore.
Well, Soviet period... I don't mean to simplify it.
No, no, the Soviet period was very...
fascinating for me, because you have three libraries.
Library one, available for general public.
Library two, available for party researchers.
And library three, certain collections available only to police bureau, banned books, sort of.
And that could be anything.
That could be anything.
That could be Hemingway.
For example, you had
Great Soviet Encyclopedia, 1950s edition.
Right after Stalin died, Beria was killed.
Subscribers received... a segment.
He said, please remove pages 28 to 30.
Really?
No.
Yes.
It was Beria, and replaced this Bering Sea.
Is this it?
Yeah.
Can I document this?
That's wonderful.
Dr. Kasinek, he will give you a censored version of Bolshoi-Sovetska Encyclopedia.
And so now, you have libraries over there discovering... I was at a dinner that Paul gave, by the way, for Zaitsev, and I went to that.
And in fact, he introduced him as, he said, he's the Bartram Gregorian of St.
Petersburg.
He knows everybody.
But it's a difficult situation they find themselves in, and all of a sudden there's no money.
The collections are in desperate disarray.
But from a nation of readers, Russia was nation of readers on the Soviet Union.
The only thing left to you were 19th century classics, 18th century classics, as a source of consolation for an educated person, poetry and so forth.
Now it's gone post-Soviet, in which television, all of these others are vying for the public's attention.
The book is still considered in Russia and so forth as
a valuable commodity.
It was just a piece that they're selling everything.
Trash, it doesn't matter.
They're selling everything.
Insatiable appetite for everything.
But also, I think libraries are in terrible shape because I'm sure they're selling also clandestinely collections and so forth.
Well, they are.
That's not... We know that.
It's something that... And I know we only have a few minutes.
Also, in the hamburger piece, which I thought was...
a great comment, and you may say it here, but we talk about, you talk about libraries as repositories of memory.
And it's not just information, not just books as objects, but they are repositories of generations of memory.
And, you know, when I see something like Sarajevo, for instance, when it was deliberate targeting and destruction of a library and to destroy in one night 1.2 million books,
I have to feel that's not just a random act of war, that is a deliberate attempt to erase... Assassinate memory.
And, I mean, is this what... Assassinate memory, yes.
And so when I talk about libraries of the future, you know, everything is not necessarily all wonderful and rosy and computerized and digitized.
We also have it within our capability, don't we, to continue to do this kind of... Destructive act.
Well, one of the things that the libraries, in every totalitarian culture, the first enemy, as in Orwell, is seen as the book library.
Library always has been seen as a source of threat.
Because it is memory.
And memory allows you to compare, to remember.
compare, transcend, to see comparatively.
And whenever you see relativistically other truths, other shades, that never is well left.
Can you think of any specific examples where the libraries have been targeted?
Well, you just take Nazi Germany.
Burning all the decadent books.
Like Russia, banning books.
China.
Suddenly, Chuan Lai's book, or Bichai Chu's book, not being available.
Khrushchev, when he stepped down.
Not available, yeah?
Stalin, after his death.
Not available.
Trotsky.
Bernstein, Trotsky.
Listed.
Attacks against him.
His books are not available.
Even, dare we say, the Catholic Church and its index?
Catholic Church.
But at least Catholic Church kept index of what they had banned.
So there wasn't consistency.
Not only consistency, but you kept a memory of what you had banned.
That's very interesting, isn't it?
Others had eliminated even that.
Orwell's adoption that whoever controls the present controls the future is at the source of all of these things.
The past is considered to be dangerous, knowledge of the past.
Whoever controls the past and memory, 1984 says, controls the present, and whoever controls the present controls the future.
So the OO articulated in pretty much those terms?
Yeah, exactly those terms.
The big brother.
So that's the 1984, which I haven't read.
And of course, another thing I'm interested in is the erection, the establishment of these emigre libraries.
That when you try to destroy a memory,
Okay, maybe you can where you are, but then you find, like I just learned in Poland, for instance, when there was no Poland, the Polish National Library was in Paris.
Yes.
Portable.
Portable memory.
That's right.
And so we have in New York City all these wonderful little emigre libraries.
Well, in New York City, you had one of the first exhibitions we did at the New York Public Library was Ethnic Press in New York.
You have, without exaggerating, 200 ethnic presses in New York.
You have six Chinese dailies, I'm told.
Four Korean dailies, Japanese, 47 Yiddish and Hebrew, Greek, all kinds of publications.
Armenian, two Armenian newspapers in New York.
And this is another time also when Armenia was without a country.
Yeah, but all of them keep the memory and diaspora alive.
Jewish Bund.
Their library now just went out of business.
I think it was incorporated.
I was talking about 1905.
They were expelled from Marxist, Leninists, Bolsheviks and Mensheviks, expelled them because they wanted to be nationalist Marxists.
They said, you cannot do that.
Well, where did they bring their library?
United States, New York.
Ninety-year-old people still working about the debates of 1905, Jewish boom, as if it happened yesterday.
This is a good little area for me to explore, don't you think?
Yeah.
Before the collapse of the Soviet Union, Philip Roth wrote to me.
He was sponsoring Hungarian writers in this country.
It was Hungarian press in New York.
publishing their works.
Polish, five, six papers, weeklys in New York.
German, French.
That's a whole underground press, which I call a parallel memory.
New York is unique to this.
Incredible.
And you're going back.
Well, it's an incredible place.
My time is running out.
Well, let's get together again, because this article will answer 80% of your questions.
And then let's focus on 20%.
Okay.
And then we'll get a nice, sharp, good... Yeah.
I think we're up.
Let me just see if there's one other quick thing.
Just let me, if I may.
I do have about five minutes.
Just make sure there's anything that's not...
Maybe we could just wrap it up by going back to the beginning.
I read also that you started as a page in the library.
Tabriz.
Is this the start for you?
Yeah, because what allows... It allowed me to save my life in many ways.
My inner life and my future life.
Because pressures put on people like the peer pressure.
all my young friends and so forth.
Why are you going to the library?
You know, are you one of the nerds and so forth?
And you say, no, I have to work.
You can justify it.
When I was at the New York Public Library, I discovered how many pages there were.
Jimmy Cagney was a page at the New York Public Library.
You should ask how they forget.
Gee, that's good.
Because I'm also interested in writers who were librarians, like Borges, and Goethe was a librarian, Lessing was a librarian, and Laozi Tu, I think, was that.
Somebody was a librarian.
But I think you should look at that, because... Pages.
Pages at MPL.
That's great.
I think we've got an hour here.
We've got a good start.
and a wonderful staff.
Just a good staff.
He said that I have said it when he quotes me.
Somebody said that you've said that libraries... Yeah, I have since used that.
Ken Burns, who produced... Oh, okay, sure.
Yeah, he said in one of his speeches that... Do you ascribe... Do you ascribe... Yeah, I must have said it, and it must have made an impression on him.
And this is about technology, mostly, which is very important.
This is about canon and...
Everything.
And this one was quoted in New York Review of Books and Farrell, and this is eight years.
That's his origin rate.
Well, I think this is just like... Just briefly, I'm going to London in two weeks, and this is going to be a major international focus.
Can you think of any people that you'd recommend that I should see?
Nicholas Ram?
What's the name?
Nicholas Barker.
And also Lord Quentin.
Yes, right.
Okay, good.
Good.
Okay, excellent.
And Paul, who I just chatted with, said, please give Martin my very, very best.
They're all thrilled that you're coming back.